Thank you, Tom, for such a comprehensive explanation of our situation.
We have a few questions left.
The last one from this section is about Russian and Iranian trade.
Everyone in Ukraine knows that Russia buys Shaheads and ballistic missiles and everything else from Iran.
From time to time, you're expressing your doubts about the actual amount of such military trade.
Could you please share with us your thoughts?
There is no alliance between Russia and Iran.
There is a relation between a customer and seller.
And there is lots of rivalry and lots of mistrust, especially from Iranians.
So all these stories about ballistic missiles, where are they?
I haven't seen any kind of Iranian ballistic missiles in Russia yet.
Because we already destroyed all of them?
Of course.
A few weeks ago.
You have even destroyed the secret depots where they were stored, you know?
Okay, seriously now.
There are no ballistic missiles in Iran, ballistic missiles in Russia.
Except they have delivered them the last five days, say.
No, it's not going to happen.
And for a simple reason that the Iranians do not trust the Russians.
I mean, study a little bit the history of Russia and Iran and their rivalry.
And you're going to see that they hate each other almost like Ukrainians and Russians are hating each other nowadays.
So, and then check the history of the last 20, 30 years and all the repeated attempts of Tehran to buy major weapons systems from Russia.
And every single one, almost every single one was screwed up, excuse me for his passion, in one way or the other, by the Russians.
And then you have the situation in the Caspian Sea where the Iranians would like to bring in their ships for exploration of gas and oil.
They know that it is there at the bottom of the sea, but they cannot bring their ships to explore it, to find it and to start drilling for it and exploiting it.
Because the Russians wouldn't let them do so.
You cannot bring such a ship, these are big ships, they are very wide, they are very heavy.
And you cannot, the Iranians cannot build them on their own, on the Caspian, on their coast of the Caspian Sea.
So they would have to bring them via the river and channel systems of Russia from the Black Sea and so on.
You know this better than me.
So, the Russians wouldn't let them.
They wouldn't let them.
So this is the problem number one for the Iranians.
Number two, I said every single major arms deal between Moscow and Tehran of the last 20 years was, 30 years actually, was messed up by the Russians.
There would be an agreement, a contract was signed, Iranians would pay 50% advance and nothing happened.
All the Russia, or if something happened, the Russians would deliver something entirely different than the Iranians have ordered.
For example, the Iranians have ordered S-300 air defense systems, long range air defense systems.
Russians delivered tour, short range air defense systems and such things.
And in some cases, for example, Iranians have in one case, they went to Moscow and said, look, we want MiG-31s.
Here is one billion for them, right on the table, deliver them in one or two years whenever.
The Russians pocketed money and did nothing.
And then two years later, after lots of complaints from Tehran, the Russians delivered yet more tours and what was it, books and such things instead.
So why should Iranians trust them?
They have no reason.
Shahid's UAVs, attack UAVs was an exception from the rule.
Why? Because the Russians were so stupid to pay for something that is worth perhaps $5,000 to pay $200,000 per single Shahid.
Your own hackers have found this out.
So it was a brilliant opportunity, nothing special, no high technology from China actually.
Okay, let them have it. We are cashing millions from this.
And that is why Russians have such weaponry.
But other Iranian weaponry, I haven't seen anything of that kind in Russia.
I've seen mortars and mortar shells of Iranian origins in Ukraine, but not in Russia.
So, that much about that.
And even if this fat, everybody is calling it ballistic missile, this is not a ballistic missile, this is an artillery rocket.
It is similar like BM-27 or BM-30, which Ukraine is also operating, BM-27, not BM-30.
And which Russia is already operating.
This is a heavy rocket, which is relatively precise and has a range of 100-120 km.
Of course, if Iranians would deliver any to Russia, that would be a big problem for Ukraine, because they have a big warhead.
And if Iranians would deliver even just a few hundreds of them to Russia, Russian firepower would increase significantly.
But so far I haven't seen an atom of evidence that any have been delivered to Russia.
And there is a good reason for this.
Because, for example, Iranian Air Force would like to acquire Su-35s.
But if the Iranians acquire Su-35s, they do not only want the aircraft, but they want also the capability to maintain this aircraft at home,
which in turn means they need the capability to manufacture spare parts for this aircraft at home.
And the Russians, this is something the Russians won't deliver even to the Chinese not to talk about Iranians.
So, as a bargain for such an eventuality, Iranians are holding back their ballistic missiles.
And now, when Iran is almost in a state of war with Israel, even more so.
They are not crazy to say, let's sell out our entire missile arsenal to Russia.
We are going to earn a few billion.
But if they sell off their ballistic missiles, they have nothing to shoot at Israel.
Therefore, all of these stories about thousands of Iranian ballistic missiles and blah, blah, blah, blah, to Russia.
And finally, after all of this, I said mistrust, bad experiences and so on.
Iranians have attempted to enter sort of strategically alliance with Putin several times and he has turned them down every single time.
They have absolutely no reason to insist on some kind of alliance with him now. Why should they?
So, even this story with alliance and whatever else, this is all lots of fantasy and at least as much hysteria.
And if nothing else, it's usually used in order for some, especially in the West, for some propagating some third point of issues.
Like, for example, the first time that there was a talk about the sale of F-35s to Israel, there was promptly a report that Iran is buying 100 Su-27s.
I mean, which is nonsense. Of course, Iran never bought Su-27s, but because it was buying them, because of fake news, Israel should get F-35s, no problem.
This is how it works.
Thank you, Tom. Let's hope they will not deal with each other.
Last few questions and let's try to cover them shortly.
The first one, will Russian Federation complete the railway to Crimea this year?
Yes. Isn't it already to Melitopol?
I'm not sure. Do you think that this will cause huge consequences for us?
Of course, of course, because a railway from what is the place, Niprov down to Melitopol, for example, it's making things massively easier for the Russians.
They do not need a catch bridge anymore. They can transport, what, 5,000 kg, 5,000 tons, sorry, a day to Melitopol. It's perfect for them.
And the Ukrainians can, of course, try to hit that with missiles and so on and so on, but the Russians have it easier to repair a railway, then it's much more complicated to repair a bridge instead.
So it is a perfect solution for them.
Thank you. Regarding the bridge, what do you think, is it possible to destroy the Crimean bridge with missiles?
With missiles alone? Not really. You can damage it temporarily, close it for a few weeks or even for two months, and that's it.
But you really need big missiles and really have to hit, a very precise hit in a specific part of the construction.
You mean ballistic missiles?
Ballistic missiles, yes. No, no, cruise missiles, okay. I mean, it doesn't matter. You need something like a 2,000 kg warhead and this must be extremely precise in hitting this particular part of the construction in order to drop a bridge.
It is pointless to hit the middle of the bridge because you're just going to create a gap in the road. What is going to happen? We have seen this on so many other examples, Antonovsky bridge.
Almost two years ago. So, excuse me. Right now, I don't see Ukraine having an ability to drop the catch bridge.
Okay, thank you. Tom, we have the last question. You recently described the scenario for ending the war in the Middle East. You yourself called it almost fantastic.
Yeah, it is fantasy, yes.
Yes, so could you please describe more or less realistic scenario for ending the war in Ukraine?
No, I can't because I have no idea how to end it. I mean, there is so much reform necessary alone in Ukraine. You would need to reorganize the way your government is thinking, not only to say acting.
You would need to bring your population all to one side and say, guys, we are really in danger of extermination. If you are sitting at home and watching TV, you are screwing up all of us.
You don't even have this psychology. I mean, okay, you have lots of volunteers and people are really trying to help the country and so on, but a big part of the population is just sitting there and doing nothing for Ukraine.
Then, as next, you would have to understand that you need many more women in your armed forces in your industry and so on and so on.
I cannot understand that you still have unemployed people at war. You have unemployed people in Ukraine. How can this happen?
I said your defense sector is idling around, working at 40% to 60% of capacity.
And even if it would certainly like to work at higher capacity, but it can't because the government does not have the money for that.
And so you have serious problems, very extensive problems with you. I have no idea how to solve all of this.
So therefore, I have no clear idea how can you solve the problem. I mean, ideally, you would manufacture, let's say, 500 to 1000 tanks a year, and then you would manufacture a similar number of heavy infantry fighting vehicles.
That means vehicles as well armored as tanks. You would manufacture not one million FPV drones a year, but five million of them.
You would have enough pilots and crews for all of this. You would equip your entire armed forces. You would have, ideally, you would have enough artillery ammunition.
And even more important, you would have such missiles like FAT, or rockets, actually, sorry, artillery rockets like FAT, which means you can deliver a warhead of 100, 200, 300 kilogram over range of 100 kilometers.
Ideally, you would need something like 20, at least 20 Patriot Sam batteries, plus a similar number of IST and SamT. You don't have anything of this.
And I don't see you getting anything of this, but even enough to patch up your air defenses and so on and so on.
So I have no solution right now. What you need is plenty of firepower. And I mean really firepower in terms of 100, 200, 300 kilogram warheads been delivered and obliterating entire Russian units.
This is happening perhaps once a month, but this is too little. You would need this happening every single day.
I also do not understand, I mean, how long is it now that you have got the first high mass that was in summer 2022? So two years. And you're still not manufacturing high mass at home?
I cannot understand this. Why not? You're all the time waiting for Americans to have mercy and send you another 30 rockets.
Why is nobody manufacturing ATACOMS in Ukraine? Out of mind of what? Instead, the government has been, as far as I have heard, is letting the Americans buy agricultural surfaces, real estate.
I mean, it's not letting them buy directly, but it says, okay, if some foreigner wants to buy it, please, let's do it. And Ukrainians don't have the money to do so, so foreigners are buying it.
And the first foreigners who are doing it in the soil are the Americans. So you're going to end as what?
Heavy indebted, lucky home territory. I don't know where this heading. I have no solution for this problem, excuse me. I mean, Middle East is perfect in comparison.
Thank you, Tom. I hope our audience will make appropriate conclusions from your words. And at the end, I would just mention that we're not publishing all of Tom's texts. That's, I'm talking to our audience, all of Tom's texts for different reasons.
But if you are looking for an interesting, competent overview of the events in the Middle East, I would probably suggest you to take a look at Tom's blog, because I believe that a person who spent almost 40 years studying this region
probably knows a bit more comparing to those experts you are watching on our TV. So thank you so much, Tom. It was a big pleasure to talk to you. And they hope we will have another interview a bit later.
Thank you very much for inviting me as well. And please keep yourself safe and do the best for your country and for all of you.
Thank you, Tom. Goodbye, everyone. Stay safe.
