Great, greetings to everyone who is watching us, hope you all are safe.
My name is Konstantin Shabalev, and today we together with my colleague, media expert
Sergey Chernevsky are happy to introduce our guest.
It's Tom Cooper, military historian, writer and analyst from Austria.
Tom himself has Austria's Mozart, not kangaroo, but I hope that our audience is educated enough not to confuse.
Hello, Tom, how are you?
Hello, thank you, fine, nice to be with you today.
Great, so among other things, Tom is known in Ukraine as an author of regular updates on the Russian-Ukrainian war.
And almost six months have passed since our first interview, a lot of things changed, and we'd like to discuss them with Tom.
We tried to divide our conversation in several sections, like Tom does in his updates, so the first chapter of our talk is called the Ground War.
And the first question is the following, Tom, we are forced to start with a sad topic earlier this week, Ukraine with Derov from Vuhledar.
And you were describing this process almost live, and now we'd like to know your opinion on what consequences will it cause for Ukraine.
Vuhledar, it's a topic, very frustrating topic because this was such a left down of a great unit that was fighting courageously and with huge skill for two years in that place alone,
we talked about the Battle of Moschun, north-west of Kiev, back in March 2022, and was now left down by top political leadership in Ukraine, by the general staff of Ukrainian armed forces, like really, it's in a most shameful way.
And what should I tell you, I mean, it wasn't really an orderly withdrawal, everybody is calling withdrawal in Ukraine.
Actually, the last two or three days, the defenses of the 72nd collapsed, the Russians attacked from three sides, draw in, captured, I don't know how many troops killed, I don't know how many troops, including plenty of wounded troops,
the soldiers of the 72nd have demanded a withdrawal on time, there was no reaction from Kiev at all, as usually, I mean, it is a shameful episode in the history of Ukraine and nothing else.
It is such a meanwhile typical failure of the political and military leadership in the country that I simply, I cannot understand that something of this kind is happening.
And now, what is after, what now, well, what is left of the 72nd Brigade, perhaps 1000 troops who are tired, exhausted, demoralized, who is going to replace them, who is going to replace such an excellent defense position for the next 30 or 40 kilometers in western or northwestern direction, there is nothing.
So when you ask me what is going to happen now or whatever, I'm not sure, I mean, the only thing we can actually expect is Russia, further Russian advance in western and northwestern direction, or northern direction towards Pokrovsk, that's what's going to happen.
And I do not see the Ukrainian armed forces having a strong position on the way to say Pokrovsk. That's the situation.
Okay, we'll talk about the Ukrainian command a bit later and you mentioned Pokrovsk. Our second question was about this place. Russian army continues to slowly advance towards Pokrovsk.
And what do you think, if they do manage to occupy it, what will be their next target? As I understand, it's some kind of point from which they can advance in different ways.
Pokrovsk, that is related to Vukhleda. And to the situation at the political top in Kiev and in the general staff of the Ukrainian armed forces. If they continue fighting this war the way they are doing this the last year or so, actually the last one and a half year, almost two years, Pokrovsk is lost already now.
It's pointless to fight for it almost, because it's nothing is going to happen over there, except yet more losses for Ukraine and yet more victories for Russia.
Well, this victory is actually laughable, but okay, who cares. Point is this, you have a president who is fighting for some kind of imaginary USAID and spending and wasting his time with some kind of peace plan which he is then traveling to the United States and presenting it there and to Biden and to Trump and so on.
And what peace plan? What peace plan? There is only one party in this war which can stop this war immediately. And this is Russia, this is Putin. He can stop immediately. Ukraine has no chance to do anything of that kind.
The United States has no chance of doing that. Germany has no chance. Whoever else has no chance. But Russia can stop it. But Russia has absolutely no reason to stop it, because everything is working straight into Putin's hands.
Then the next point. Expecting the Americans now to start providing sufficient support for Ukraine to win this war, to at least liberate some kind of serious portion of territory inside Ukraine is not going to happen.
If nobody in Ukraine has realized this by now, well, it's about the time for somebody to start realizing it finally. But this is also not happening. So you are wasting, your political leadership is wasting time for some kind of fantasies around.
The only thing I've seen him doing that is making sense in the last, let's say, two weeks was this conference with different manufacturers and designers of modern weaponry and trying to attract them into investing into Ukrainian sector of manufacturing defense equipment, ammunition and weaponry.
And this is all. And this is also too little. And going also in some kind chaotic direction, because what is happening? You have, for example, Denmark financing the production of Bohdan self-propelled howitzer in Ukraine.
Beautiful idea, really. You have also another company investing into production of ammunition for such howitzers in Ukraine, also beautifully there.
But who is going to protect this factory where this ammunition is going to be manufactured? Who is going to protect the factory where the Bohdanas are going to be manufactured? And who is going to protect the power supply network, which is necessary in order to manufacture this stuff?
For this, you need air defenses, and you are getting too little air defense systems from the West and even less surface to air missiles from the West.
And nobody is going to invest, obviously, so far into, for example, Ukrainian companies like Luch and Artyom, launching production of Ukrainian designed surface to air missiles.
So this means, okay, you build something and then it's going to be destroyed by the Russians because you cannot protect it.
Is that making sense to you? It is not making sense to me. And what we have actually here right now, or meanwhile, Ukraine is another typical example of Western warfare of the last 30, 40 years.
The West can lose another war. We can afford that. It has lost Iraq. It has lost Afghanistan. No problem. We can afford to lose Ukraine as well. Also, no problem.
We have all the time of the world. We are more concerned about the next vacation, new car, our internet connection, watching Netflix in the evening, football, whatever else, having fun.
Everything is fine for us. But Ukraine, if you lose the war, there's no Ukraine left anymore.
And nobody here in the West is understanding this situation. And nobody is taking corresponding measures. You get lots of promises. Ukraine is getting lots of promises.
But in the end effect, nothing is happening. So you have a situation where the Western point of view and the Ukrainian point of view are at entirely different levels.
Ukrainian point of view is somewhere up here. The Western, oh, who cares? And who cares if West loses again in Ukraine? Nobody cares. Because we can afford that.
And nobody in Ukraine right now is taking care or sufficient care to make this obvious in the West, firstly and secondly, to say, okay, thank you very much.
You do not want to help seriously in serious fashion. You do not want to help us to defeat Russia. Whatever are the reasons, your fantasies about modeling the outcome and saving Russia from falling apart and saving Putin from losing face or whatever else.
Okay, fine. Thank you. Then just finance this and that. Thank you very much. And that's all we need. Because this is the only way forward. Ukraine must make itself as much as possible independent from any kind of Western political or military influence.
But at the same time develop its own defense sector, the industry, so so well and protect it so well that it can actually manufacture, develop and produce, put to the field.
Enough heavy armament, enough ammunition for its own needs and defeat Russia. You have no other way out of this situation. But right now, there are just conferences talking about talking, meetings, one meeting after the other.
You're almost answered on a bunch of our next questions. That may I turn you back for a few moments to clarify one question, which buzzers as me and Sergey, we are from Dnipro.
Together, do you think Russians can achieve Dnipro in a few months or next year? Dnipro, I mean, not river, but city.
Do the Russians, can the Russians reach Dnipro within one year or the next year? Oh, gosh, that's a good question. Let me check a map. I don't know all the distances by heart. Ukraine.
Dnipro.
Dnipro.
No, within one year not, not next year not. And if the, but if the things go on like, like the last, let's say one year, definitely by 2026.
So by saying this, you mean that the war will still continue in 2026?
Definitely. The way things are right now, no way this is going to stop even before 2030. Because you have, because Ukraine is not taking care to get the means to fight on its own without any kind of Western interference, which is nonsensical, nothing else.
And at the same time, the West is not interested in helping Ukraine fight this war in a quicker fashion and more effective fashion.
So you are actually going to have only the worsening of the situation because you can see this for just one example.
Every night, Russians are sending between, let's say 1520 and 5060 Shahid or Geran attack UAVs over the Ukrainian airspace, at least one third of this, that is, let's say, at least five and more often 2030 of this shot down by surface to air missiles, which are supplied by the West.
So this means an attrition of some, let's say, per week, that's something like 5060 surface to air missiles, which the West is not manufacturing.
The West manufactures as many missiles perhaps a month, but not per week, which means that at some point in time, you're going to run out of surface to air missiles again.
And the West is not going to do anything necessary to bolster, to rapidly increase the production of its surface to air missiles, because if it would be doing something, it would be doing that already now.
It would have announced this at least now, if not already two years ago, but it didn't do so.
And therefore, sooner or later, you're going to run out of surface to air missiles, probably this winter.
As next, the Russians are then going to disable your power supply, the remaining thermal and hydroelectric power stations, power plants.
And then, when you don't have the electricity, how can you manufacture?
You can't manufacture guns, you can't manufacture ammunition.
And you can't keep your civilian supply with electricity.
What then?
So unless there is a significant change in these regards alone, there is no improvement of the situation.
And then thirdly, there was this big announcement of Czech arms deal or Czech artillery ammunition deal.
They have found some source, probably Turkey, and they are going to supply how many? Two million or whatever artillery shells in addition to what is going to come to production.
Eventually, oh no, this is not really good.
That is what the western industry said to that, and because the western industry said so, the politicians said so as well.
And you haven't got even one million shells out of that deal by now, and I'm not going to get one million shells by the end of the year.
Why? Because only a part of the countries of some 20 or something countries who have announced they are going to finance this position is ready to pay anything for the shells in question.
Why? Because they are cheaper than the shells manufactured in Europe.
I mean, again, the Ukrainian situation is up here, it's urgent, it's an emergency.
The western situation, how can we make more money out of this? That's the only thing that matters.
You're telling quite scary and sad things, maybe I will try to add some positive in our discussion. Let's talk about Ursk.
I was watching one of your interviews last month, and you were quite enthusiastic telling us this topic.
Do you still consider this operation successful or your opinion has changed?
When you monitor war in general, every war is an extension of politics by other means, precisely defined by von Klausowitz in the 19th century or earlier.
Anyway, in military sense, this was an excellent operation. Why? It drew into Russia, occupied territory, defeated lots of Russian units, destroyed even more Russian units,
and scared his entire regime and forced them to patch some sort of front line to withdraw, for example, units, especially from Northern Kharkiv, to Ursk in order to form a new front line.
The problem was, the usual, namely, there is not enough supply of ammunition, and there are not enough troops and units, and especially not enough air defenses to drive this, to exploit this penetration into Russia to sufficient depth, which would be some 100 kilometers, perhaps 150 kilometers.
Instead, Ukrainian units drew some 25-30 kilometers maximum into Russia, and with this, this operation remains incomplete.
So, at military level, it was an excellent idea and fantastic achievement, absolutely no doubt about this. At political level, it ended nowhere, for exactly the same set of reasons why all the other Ukrainian operations are ending nowhere,
which is that the President is fighting a war for scoring propaganda points in the West, appeasing and pleasing the Western politicians who are not interested in him actually anymore, who are not interested even in supporting Ukraine seriously enough.
And with this, we are ending actually this story. As long as Ukraine is running propaganda operations, it's not going to win the war. You cannot win a war with propaganda operations.
This is something for both the immoral on temporary basis, last for, as we can see, two months, and then it's over. But there is no liberation of any kind of Ukrainian territory, and Ukraine is not a step, not an inch, actually, closer to liberation of Donbas and of Crimea.
So, politically, nothing has changed.
So, what should Ukrainians do with Kursk next?
Well, hold it as long as you can, of course. You have no other solution. The troops are over there. If you withdraw the troops now from Ukraine, sorry, from Russia, from the Kursk oblast, that would be a huge shame.
So, another failure. Why have you sent your troops into Russia? Why have you lost at least 300 killed and over 1,000 wounded, so fine, two months of fighting? For what?
To withdraw now? Is that the aim of the operation? I think not. So, hold out as long as you can. The question is how long can you hold?
Right now, the Ukrainians have relatively good positions, especially in what is it, Orgoka and Shep-2-Kovka area. They are up in the hills, and the Russians attempt to approach them.
They hit them from above, they see them on time, hit them from above, and so on. So, it's relatively easy. On the other side of the same hill, they can see towards Lubimovka, so things are relatively simple.
If they lose these hills, which can happen, then it's going to become unpleasant, and the entire operation is going to end with a failure.
Tom, you mentioned mistakes of our political leaders, but you previously, while describing the Vuhledar operation, you already mentioned the mistakes of Ukrainian Genstab, military command.
Can you name the main mistakes, and probably you could suggest how those mistakes could be corrected?
The primary mistake is the over-centralization and micromanagement by the top of commanders, but the highest commander, especially Sieski.
What he is doing was okay, for example, to sort out the troubles in areas like, well, even that was too late, in Bakhmut last year or in Avidivka early this year.
There were too many elements from different units fighting in the same sector without coordination.
But now there comes the problem. Sieski has doubt his commanders that either they deliver him good news or they are in trouble.
So the problem is, if they are in trouble, they are going to get dismissed or something else, so he is going to command their own units over their shoulder instead of them, which is absolutely insane there.
You do not do such things. You have to train your commanders.
That's Russian style, as I can.
Well, more or less Russian style, yes.
The point is to train your commanders so that you, as the superior commanders in Sieski's position, can trust them to tell you what is going on, precisely the way it has happened, and not do you some kind of crazy favors through lying to you.
That is the first point. The second point is to train your commanders so that you can depend on them to do a good job.
Lots of Ukrainian commanders are still not doing a good job, and I'm talking about battalion and brigade commanders.
The command level in between of brigade commanders and Sieski should actually be responsible for controlling the job of brigade and battalion commanders, but it's not doing that at all.
It's like it's not there. I don't know why the officers in question actually paid, except perhaps from time to time to report.
Something nice to Sieski while they should, excuse me?
Excuse me, my cat would like to take part in this interview.
Where did I stop? Yes. You have groups of forces, and they should be doing the job which Sieski is currently doing.
My Sieski job should be to inspect and check that everything is working.
And finally, you have Genstaff, which is serving Sieski as a commander, instead of writing a new doctrine of the armed forces based on 10 years of bloody experience of the Ukrainian armed forces.
So that all the new commanders in the future, whether tomorrow or in two years from now, are instantly taught all of these experiences.
But it's not doing that. It's serving Sieski's purposes, which is centralized command and super control of everything and everybody.
And what a surprise amid all of this actually chaos, centralized chaos, it's not working. It can't work.
And it is never going to work the way it is organized right now.
It didn't work when it was decentralized under Zaluzhnyi and it's not going to work when it's over centralized under Sieski.
Apparently, in Ukrainian armed forces, you simply can't find some middle way to delegating, to teaching your subordinates to do their job, to trusting them, and so on.
This is something that is obviously sort of impossible to do. I don't know how to describe it.
And therefore, again, you have this superior commander who is controlling and commanding everybody.
And then you also have a president who is fighting a propaganda war instead of taking care to listen to advice of his military commanders,
who cannot even advise him properly because they're not listening to advice from their subordinates.
Then you have, as I said, you have a bardak, excuse me, for his passion.
And this is what you have in Ukraine right now.
I mentioned also general staff and the necessity to write a new doctrine of armed forces.
This doctrine should also teach the commanders that after every single operation, they have to sit down with their subordinates and discuss what went wrong and what was done well.
This is not done. You have something like 60 brigades in Ukrainian armed forces, and perhaps three are doing this right now.
The 47th, the 3rd, and the 4th National Guard. Perhaps the 12th National Guard as of brigade as well.
So you have less than 5% of the force is doing debriefs after operations. This is a catastrophe.
This means that all the lessons learned and paid in blood every single day are lost because nobody is learning from them.
We have seen this also in the Air Force, in the Air Defense Force.
Oh, everything is fine. We are shooting down Shahids, we are shooting down Kinshaws, we are shooting down Zyrkons, we are shooting down the Mars people and Jupiter people as well.
And then 12, at least 12 Russian cruise missiles fly through that super turbo air defense system and hit a hospital in downtown of Kiev in July.
And what is the Air Force reporting? It was just 12 missiles and we have shot down all of them, including those you can see on the videos coming down and hitting the hospital and killing women and children.
The same also with F-16, which was shot down by our own forces. How long is it now? One month? We are going to investigate. One month later?
Oh, who we? We should investigate this or what?
Excuse me, Tom, let's leave F-16.
Just a second, it came so far that the Americans do not trust themselves anymore to ask what has happened to that F-16 because they know then there is going to be no reply.
Sorry.
I wanted to say that let's leave F-16 for a bit later, we have a separate part for them.
Our last question in this section, we already told you that lots of our audience is located in the southern Ukraine in Kherson.
What's your predictions for Kherson and Kherson region for this fall and the next year?
My predictions, I said I'm not making predictions, I'm making post-assessments.
Let's say estimate.
Okay, okay, okay, estimate. Just a second, I'm powering up a map of the battlefield.
What you can expect next is that the Russians are going to attack from Wukhle, the directions towards what is the place first in the direction of Bahatia and Constantinople in order to, because there is nothing in between,
there is just open terrain, there are no hills, no forests, just open fields.
So they have something like 30 kilometers up to there and this is where they are going to close this corner with something like a dozen of Ukrainian brigades in between of Wukhle and southern side of the battlefield at Pokrovsk.
In Pokrovsk itself, you have to expect them to drive around such fortifications still left in front of the town like Selidove, for example, that's what they are already doing, they are trying to surround Selidove by an advance from southern side and then from the northern side as well,
because the 15th Karadag is doing a very good job with defending Selidove, so they know they cannot take the town without surrounding it first and those forcing the 15th Brigade, National Guard Brigade to withdraw from there in order to avoid that encirclement.
So once they do that, they are going to go up to Lisik and Chefchenko and search for a way to start surrounding Pokrovsk as well, that is Pokrovsk.
The rest of that operation, I mean, once they are in Pokrovsk, well, then I'm not sure what exactly they're going to do, but they're probably going to try to finish off Toretsk in between.
Toretsk is going to take them another two or three months probably to complete, but not much longer, so we can expect that Toretsk is going to fall by the end of this year.
Pokrovsk, I would say by March, reaching Pavlovgrad might become their next objective, but that is going to take them another year, so sometimes in summer, autumn next year, they might get all the way to Pavlovgrad.
What else do we have in between? Up-to-front line?
Excuse me, May I ask you to move south and to Kerson?
To remain in the south. Well, basically, they need not attacking in the south, they need not attacking Southern Zaporozhia because everything is doing along their ideas in the east.
So why attacking where they are not going to get to as we have seen this summer in Robotinia area, for example, in what is that?
Excuse me, just a check to map. South of Velikonovo, Silka, in Urogyne, for example, okay, they have captured Urogyne, but they cannot hold it.
Why wasting their resources by deploying them somewhere else if they are successful in the east? And they are successful in the east.
So can I conclude that the situation for Kerson will remain the same for the next year?
For the next year and a half, as long as not something substantial happens in Kiev, for example.
Thank you, Tom. Let's move to the second chapter, which is called Air War.
And the first question will be about Russian Cubs, guided bombs.
There are reports that Russia has increased the range of its Cubs from 30 kilometers to up to even 80 kilometers.
And the question is how much further can this range be increased?
Okay, first start. Russia didn't increase the range. The range was 60 to 70 kilometers already last year.
This is simply physics. And this physics comes from the weight of the weapon combined with the speed of the aircraft carrying it.
At the time it's released, plus the attitude of the aircraft at the time it's released the bomb.
So what happens, SO-34 comes in at an altitude between 9,000 and 12,000 meters at a high subsonic speed.
Which means something like 1,100 kilometers per hour.
So then it enters a shallow claim and it flies like this and releases the bomb.
The bombs drop from the aircraft, open their wings and then they glide over 60 to 70 kilometers in a parabolic trajectory until hitting the ground.
So the point is now the following. Depending on the sector of the front line where they deploy such bombs,
in some cases Russians are free to fly their SO-34s all the way over the Ukrainian positions.
For example, in Wuchleda area the last two weeks they were free to fly over Wuchleda.
Because the glorious general staff of Ukrainian armed forces didn't take care to deploy at least proper air defenses of that place.
Therefore, they could reach 70 kilometers behind Wuchleda.
But in other sectors, for example Kursk, they can't.
In Kursk the Ukrainian air defenses are strong enough that the Russians have to release their bombs from 70 kilometers away from, let's say, 50 kilometers behind their front line.
To reach a target only 20 kilometers behind the Ukrainian front line, 10 to 20 kilometers behind the Ukrainian front line.
And then it appears to plenty of people that the range is shorter than just 30 kilometers.
In other cases, the Russians do not need to hit something that is further away than 30 kilometers.
So they are releasing their bombs and they are striking targets just 30 kilometers away.
Because the target is simply closer and less well protected.
So, correspondingly, the range was always 60 to 70 kilometers.
And now it might be increased to around 100 kilometers with help of rocket boosters.
That means there is a rocket engine, rocket motor, sorry, installed on the rear, at the rear of the UMPK.
And this is then powering the bomb and instead of glide bomb it's becoming a guided missile de facto.
So that is the answer to your question.
That's clear, Tom.
Is it true that Russians already developed not far-flying Cubs but also more powerful Cubs?
I mean that more heavier ones.
For example, everyone knows about Cup 500 but some people already say about Cup 900 or something like that.
Okay, let me clarify this.
In the Soviet and therefore Russian Air Force you have specific calibers of bombs.
250 kilogram, 500 kilogram, 1,500 kilogram, 3,000, 5,000 and 9,000 kilogram bombs.
Okay, these are the biggest bombs.
A FAB, Fugas, an aviation bomb, 5,000, 9,000 was the biggest one.
And this 9,000 means it is 9,000 kilogram heavy or somewhere like that.
So correspondingly, for 9,000 kilogram bomb you need a bomb which can carry a bomb weighting 9 tons.
That is the first point.
The second point is in order to make a glide bomb out of such a bomb you need very big wings, big wing surface.
And the bigger the wing surface, the further it's flying.
Which in turn means you need the bomb itself is getting ever grow bigger and bigger.
Correspondingly, there is a big problem already with the bomb in caliber of 3,000 kilogram of 3 tons.
The construction, this UMP key construction, this module which is installed on top of the bomb is splitting wings.
So it becomes a glide bomb.
It's so big and so heavy that the bomb is weighting something like 4 tons.
That means that a single SO-34 can only carry one at once.
Also because of its sheer size.
It is not only the size, it is the weight as well.
Because you have to consider you put a 4,000 kilogram bomb under an aircraft.
And to connect it to the aircraft you need a hard point, which is we call this pylon in English, which can carry 4,000 kilogram.
And this pylon weights another 1,000 kilogram.
So now you have 4,000 kilogram of a bomb, 1,000 kilogram of the pylon.
And then you put that on the aircraft, on the SO-34, in between the engines.
And in this way you have put 4,000 kilogram on the aircraft.
SO-34 could theoretically carry 8,000 kilogram of bombs, but then it's going to fly for the next 200 kilometers.
But because of the threat of Russian bases, they have moved the SO-34s away from bases close to Ukraine.
Therefore they have to fly very far away, from very far away, from the warground in similar places.
And therefore they carry only one such bomb at once.
So that is theory. Why?
Because so far all I've seen, the biggest I've seen as deployed was 1,500 kilogram.
You are talking only about Russians or?
Russians, Russians, just Russians.
1,500 kilogram.
It could be that they have dropped one or two 3,000...
There are prototypes of 3,000 kilogram heavy UMPK or carb bomb, if you like it.
It could be they have deployed two or three of this, but I haven't seen any clear evidence, any definite evidence that there is such a weapon in serious production in Russia.
At least not its UMPK module.
There are 3,000 kilogram bombs in Russian arsenals and they are in production as well.
But there are no UMPK modules which can be installed on such bombs and manufactured in serious.
So most of the times they are actually dropping bombs, UMPK bombs or carb bombs, if you like, of 250 kilogram and 500 kilogram.
From time to time they are dropping those of 1,500 kilogram.
But 3,000 kilogram, I haven't seen clear evidence for any so far.
Even somewhere throughout the world, not only in Ukraine?
When we are talking about around the world...
Yes, the question is, are there any examples of applying such huge stuff, at least somewhere?
Maybe on the Middle East or somewhere else?
Okay, I see now what you mean.
Here we have to distinguish between bombs designed and manufactured, originally manufactured in Soviet Union and nowadays in Russia, and between western bombs.
Because western bombs are made of parts which should assemble together as necessary.
They are very flexible, they are modular, but they are construction.
On Soviet dash Russian bombs, everything is welded together.
That's it, bomb is delivered to the air base as it was manufactured, as it was put together already in the factory.
You can't change anything about it.
So the fundamental question, or the fundamental issue while developing the carb or the UMP key, was how to make a module which you can put on such a bomb which is already ready for use.
And this means that every different caliber of bomb needs a different UMP key module.
And this module must be ever bigger and bigger because it needs ever bigger wings, so that it can reach these 60 to 70 kilometers.
Correspondingly, nobody tried to do anything of this kind outside of Russia.
At least not with bombs bigger than 250 kilograms.
Most Koreans have a similar system, like UMP key, which is useful for bombs caliber 250, perhaps 500 kilograms.
And I've seen them in use by Sudanese Air Force over Yemen, for example.
Gosh, this is also 7 years ago or something like that.
So this is all I have seen in regards to Soviet dash Russian bombs.
Then it comes to western bombs. The situation is entirely different because western bombs are modular and you can put the same kit, so-called kit, on different caliber of bombs.
You have bombs caliber 125 kilograms, 250, 500, and 1000, actually not 907, but let's say 1000 kilograms.
So you put the same guidance kit and the same set of wings on different caliber of bombs.
You can also use specialized casings or bomb bodies, like BLU-109, this is this bunker-buster bomb of 1000 kilogram caliber, or 2000 pounds, as we have seen when Israel assassinated Nasrallah.
This is a specially hardened casing, which makes sure that bomb penetrates, you know, goes down to the ground, 20, 30 meters to the ground before detonating.
But the guidance system and the wings system for this bomb is still the same like on any general bomb, caliber 250 kilometers, because these bodies are all very flexible and modular.
So this is the difference. However, there are no heavier, at least not in widespread tactical service, no heavier air released bombs in western service or of western origin than 1000 kilogram.
There is one type, this massive penetrator, whatever, 10,000 kilogram bomb in the United States, but this is carried only by B-2 bombers, and that's it, not a tactical aircraft can deploy it.
So the heaviest bombs of this caliber are around 1000 kilograms in the west.
Tom, what about Ukraine? Can Ukraine, for example, use our favorite F-16s to apply such stuff?
Yes, of course. You could put two 1000 kilogram bombs on F-16.
What do you think? Is Ukrainian command going to use it?
Yes, you have already underdeveloped such a weapon. I'm just not sure if it is caliber 1000 kilogram, but you certainly have such underdeveloped a weapon of 500 kilogram.
That's very interesting. So let's stay on our favorite topic. Tom, how could you, what's your opinion of the using of western aircraft in Ukraine?
In order to use western aircraft in Ukraine, you have to change the entire system, how aviation is operating in Ukraine, and this is happening very, very slowly.
It took the delivery of F-16s to Ukraine for the top civilian authority in Ukraine, I forgot the name, sorry now, to write a new set of regulations for pilots, for ground personnel, for ground control and so on, and for radar systems and so on.
So before that, you still had the same system like in the Soviet Union.
So now you have to, in order to use, the next step in using western aircraft is to teach your troops, your ground crews and your pilots to speak English.
Which is the next hurdle because despite all the talk about we are going to buy western aircraft, whether a sub-grip pen or F-16s or whatever else, of the last, let's say, 10 years or something like that, nobody in the air force took care to organize English language courses for pilots and for ground personnel.
Which means that every time Ukraine sends pilots and ground personnel for training in the west, they first have to spend 6 months, at least, learning English.
So now once they learn English, only then can they start training actual flying training or aircraft.
Before they start this actual training, flight training on aircraft, they have to learn the basic principles, procedures of flying in the west, which are fundamentally different than those in the former Soviet Union.
So even then, actually, they still do not instantly start training on aircraft, but they first learn the procedures and terminology in order to start learning flying aircraft or maintaining aircraft or arming them, refueling them and so on and so on.
So you have, every time a new group of Ukrainians is sent to west to learn flying F-16s or whatever else, it takes at least a year to get them so far that they start actually learning to fly the aircraft.
Correspondingly, from this point of view, you can instantly calculate how long is it going to take for an entire Ukrainian air force to convert to, let's say, F-16s.
This is just F-16s.
Another part is going to convert to Gripens.
At least a unit is going to fly this sub-AVAC aircraft and similar stuff.
So this is a process that is going to take years.
Can we say that today is too early to make conclusions about applying F-16s and other aircraft in Ukraine?
It's not too early. It's not too early. Don't worry.
Let's say, even if the Dutch would junk all of their 40 or whatever F-16s that are still around up on Ukraine tomorrow in the morning, it would still take you one to two years to train enough personnel to fly all of them.
You do not have enough people.
Someone is already flying.
Just flying.
Over Ukraine.
You don't have enough pilots. You don't have enough ground personnel.
You don't have the support infrastructure. You don't have the spares.
You don't have maintenance facilities in Ukraine. You don't have it. It's simply not there.
So you mean that those aircraft which already fly above Ukraine, they do not conduct any military mission?
Oh, no. I do not say that.
What do they do?
There are five F-16s in Ukraine. This is the group that was delivered, what is it, two months ago, and they are flying air combat sorties.
Air defense sorties. I'm not dispute about this.
But increasing this number to, let's say, 30 or something, to something meaningful, you know, to a number that is making sense or having its effect upon developments on the battlefield.
It's going to take its time.
Okay. That's clear.
We also had a question that is being asked throughout Ukraine for about three years.
Why don't we still have our own iron dome above Ukraine?
What's about Ukrainian air defense?
Yeah. Where should I start?
Well, I mean, you are Ukrainian. You know it better than me. You grew up in Ukraine, if nothing else. I've never been to Ukraine.
The first problem is that from the independence in 1991, 1992, until 2014, nobody cared about Ukrainian armed forces.
So they were constantly decreasing, decreasing, decreasing, decreasing, downsizing, downsizing.
Units were constantly disbanded. Air bases were closed. Nobody needed armed forces.
There was peace everywhere. Everything was so beautiful.
And well, it's a matter of fact that Ukrainian economy wasn't particularly good.
So you had a situation where there was no money for armed forces either.
And therefore, although you had excellent companies which could design a manufacturing weaponry, nobody was buying this weaponry.
And so these companies, in some cases, ended working for the Russians, and not only a few of them.
So when the Russians needed some kind of tactical-guided weapons, air-to-air missiles and so on, these were made, or at least major parts of them,
major assemblies of them were made in Ukraine. And then the Russians would either use these at home or sell them abroad, export them to whatever customers.
So now the 2014 came, and there are lots of announcements and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, and nothing happened.
Well, the most that has happened was to overhaul MiG-29s and S-25s and S-24s, very few S-24s, S-27s.
So they were overhauled. That means that they were taken apart, cleaned, refurbished, most important pieces were replaced.
Then everything was assembled, painted anew, and they received a new radio, they received new weapons management systems.
MiG-29s have even received this new computer, which is improving the performance of their radar. Beautiful.
And that's it. Nobody came to the idea, obviously, to finance the installation of development research and installation of,
or actually serious production and installation of new air-to-air missiles on MiG-29s or S-27s.
So this is the first point. The second point is, in order to have such weaponry, whether air-to-air missiles or surface-to-air missiles,
you should have had somebody who would manufacture them.
Basically, you had several design bureaus like Luch, for example, who have designs of new air-to-air missile and its surface-launched version,
with a range of something like 100 kilometers, which is something which your armed forces would need urgently right now,
and then not in a few examples, but in thousands. But it's not there. Why?
Well, because, obviously, somebody there is convinced that these are old companies, that they are too complex and they're wasting too much money
and doing nothing and they're useful and whatever else, therefore nothing is done.
And now, even if Luch would start, or actually give Artyom the production to launch this production, the serious production of this new weaponry,
it would take at least a year to introduce it to service. On the other side, meanwhile, Artyom was heavily hit several times by the Russians this summer,
so I don't even know how much of its underground facilities are still actually operational.
So why didn't this happen? Because nobody in Kiev had the far side enough to say, okay, guys, listen, we have to build up,
we have to invest into our defense sector, we have to reform it on time and then let it start manufacturing new weaponry on time.
So nothing happened in these regards, actually, even as of, was it Autumn 2022, perhaps in Autumn the last year.
And therefore, you do not have serious production, you do not have new ballistic missiles, you do not have air-to-air missiles,
you do not have surface-to-air missiles, although your companies have ready to use designs for them and they could put them into production.
The next point is also that there is always this petty bickering about who is going to get the money for this.
You have advisors to the government who are complaining that Artyom and Luch, they are old and this is too complex and let's not give them money.
Let's get this stuff from the West, which is nonsensical. It would have been better to pay Artyom already back in 2022
to start manufacturing these new air-to-air missiles and surface-to-air missiles.
However, the government back then was convinced now this war is going to end, whatever, in the 6 months, 12 months or something.
Therefore, you did not launch production on time.
Even the Neptune anti-ship missile, which is meanwhile also developed as a cruise missile, was available on in prototype form.
Some 12 or 15 examples around in February 2022 and this first successful deployment against Russian guided missile cruiser Moskva was actually something like an ultimate test of the weapon.
Before that, there was no operational unit in the Ukrainian Armed Forces operating Neptune's.
And ever since, how many are manufactured? 15 perhaps a year.
15 a year, where you could need actually, let's say at least 500 of them and probably then develop them into land attack versions, which could be launched from Asia 24.
So you don't need to beg Germans, British, French and the Americans for more storm shadows and similar stuff.
You could have had all of this already years ago.
Your government just failed to reorganize the defense sector to finance it properly to launch the production.
Right now, your defense sector is working with 40 to 60% of its capacity.
Which means actually that people are sitting there and working something like, let's say, 4 to 5 hours a day instead of 8 hours a day in 3 shifts.
This is insane. You're facing a war of extermination and your defense sector is sitting there and waiting for better times.
Because there's nobody in Kiev capable of reorganizing the financing of the sector and then the management of the sector itself.
Nothing is happening.
There are always big announcements, but until somebody from the West comes in, pays a lot of money probably somewhere and then invests a lot of money into one or the other factory, nothing happens.
And that is why you don't have modern air-to-air missiles for your suhuis and for your mix.
And why you don't have enough surface-to-air missiles.
And why, therefore, the entire production and the entire defense sector, its future functionality is under a big question mark.
Thank you, Tom, for such comprehensive explanation of our situation.
A few questions left.
The last one from this section is about Russian and Iranian trade.
Everyone in Ukraine knows that Russia buys Shahads and ballistic missiles and everything else from Iran.
From time to time, you're expressing your doubts about the actual amount of such military trade.
Could you please share with us your thoughts?
There is no alliance between Russia and Iran.
There's a relation between a customer and seller.
And there's lots of rivalry and lots of mistrust, especially from Iranians.
So all these stories about ballistic missiles, where are they?
I haven't seen any kind of Iranian ballistic missiles in Russia yet.
Because we already destroyed all of them.
Of course.
A few weeks ago.
You have even destroyed the secret depots where they were stored, you know?
Okay, seriously now.
There are no ballistic missiles in Iran, ballistic missiles in Russia.
Except they have delivered them the last five days, say.
It's not going to happen.
And for a simple reason that the Iranians do not trust the Russians.
I mean, study a little bit the history of Russia and Iran and their rivalry.
And you're going to see that they hate each other almost like Ukrainians and Russians are hating each other nowadays.
So, and then check the history of the last 20, 30 years and all the repeated attempts of Tehran to buy major weapons systems from Russia.
And every single one, almost every single one was screwed up, excuse me, for his passion in one way or the other by the Russians.
And then you have the situation in the Caspian Sea, where the Iranians would like to bring in their ships for exploration of gas and oil.
They know that it is there at the bottom of the sea, but they cannot bring their ships to explore it, to find it.
And to start drilling for it and exploiting it because the Russians wouldn't let them do so.
You cannot bring such a ship. These are big ships. They are very wide. They're very heavy.
And you cannot, the Iranians cannot build them on their own, on the Caspian, on their coast of the Caspian Sea.
So they would have to bring them via the river and channel systems of Russia from the Black Sea and so on.
You know this better than me.
So the Russians wouldn't let them. They wouldn't let them.
So this is the problem number one for the Iranians.
Problem number two, I said, every single major arms deal between Moscow and Tehran in the last 30 years, was messed up by the Russians.
There would be an agreement, a contract was signed, Iranians would pay 50% advance and nothing happened.
All the Russia, or if something happened, the Russians would deliver something entirely different than the Iranians have ordered.
That means, for example, the Iranians have ordered S-300 air defense systems, long-range air defense systems.
Russians delivered Tor, short-range air defense systems and such things.
And in some cases, for example, the Iranians, in one case, they went to Moscow and said, look, we want MiG-31s.
Here is one billion for them, right on the table, deliver them in one or two years whenever.
The Russians pocketed money and did nothing.
And then two years later, after lots of complaints from Tehran, the Russians delivered yet more tours and books and such things instead.
So why should Iranians trust them? They have no reason.
Shahid's UAVs, attack UAVs, was an exception from the rule. Why?
Because the Russians were so stupid to pay for something that is worth, perhaps, $5,000 to pay $200,000 per single Shahid.
Your own hackers have found this out.
So it was a brilliant opportunity, not in special, you know, no high technology from China, actually.
Okay, let them have it. We are cashing millions from this.
And that is why Russians have such weaponry.
But other Iranian weaponry, I haven't seen anything of that kind in Russia.
I've seen mortars and mortar shells of Iranian origins in Ukraine, but not in Russia.
So, that much about that.
And even if this fat, everybody's calling it ballistic missile, this is not a ballistic missile, this is an artillery rocket.
It is similar like BM-27 or BM-30, which Ukraine is also operating, BM-27, not BM-30.
And which Russia is already operating.
This is a heavy rocket, which is relatively precise and has a range of 100-120 kilometers.
Of course, if Iranians would deliver any to Russia, that would be a big problem for Ukraine, because they have a big warhead.
And if Iranians would deliver even just a few hundreds of them to Russia, Russian firepower would increase significantly.
But so far, I haven't seen an atom of evidence that any have been delivered to Russia.
And there is a good reason for this.
Because, for example, Iranian Air Force would like to acquire Su-35s.
But if the Iranians acquire Su-35s, they do not only want the aircraft, but they want also the capability to maintain this aircraft at home,
which in turn means they need the capability to manufacture spare parts for this aircraft at home.
And the Russians, this is something the Russians would deliver even to the Chinese, not to talk about Iranians.
So, as a bargain for such an eventuality, Iranians are holding back their ballistic missiles.
And now, when Iran is almost in a state of war with Israel, even more so.
They are not crazy to say, let's sell out our entire missile arsenal to Russia.
We are going to earn a few billion.
But if they sell off their ballistic missiles, they have nothing to shoot at Israel.
Therefore, all of these stories about thousands of Iranian ballistic missiles and blah, blah, blah, blah, to Russia.
And finally, after all of this, I said mistrust, bad experiences and so on.
Iranians have attempted to enter a sort of strategically alliance with Putin several times.
And he has turned them down every single time.
They have absolutely no reason to insist on some kind of alliance with him now.
Why should they?
So, even this story with alliance and whatever else, this is all lots of fantasy and at least as much hysteria.
And if nothing else, it's usually used in order to, for some, especially in the West, for some propagating some third point of issues.
Like, for example, the first time that there was a talk about the sale of F-35s to Israel, there was promptly a report that Iran is buying 100 S-27s.
I mean, which is nonsense.
Of course, Iran never bought S-27s, but because it was buying them because of fake news, Israel should get F-35s.
No problem.
This is how it works.
Thank you, Tom.
Let's hope they will not deal with each other.
Last few questions, and let's try to cover them shortly.
The first one, will Russian Federation complete the railway to Crimea this year?
Yes.
Isn't it already to Melitopol?
I'm not sure.
I'm not sure.
Do you think that this will cause huge consequences for us?
Of course.
Of course.
Railway from what is the place?
Niprov down to Melitopol, for example, that's making things massively easier for the Russians.
I do not need the Kerch Bridge anymore.
They can transport, what, 5000 kg, 5000 tons, sorry, a day to Melitopol.
It's perfect for them.
And the Ukrainians can, of course, try to hit that with my missiles and so on and so on,
but the Russians have it easier to repair a railway,
then it's much more complicated to repair a bridge instead.
So it is a perfect solution for them.
Thank you.
Regarding the bridge, what do you think, is it possible to destroy the Crimean Bridge with missiles?
With missiles alone, not really.
You can damage it temporarily, close it for a few weeks or even for two months, and that's it.
But you really need big missiles and really have to hit,
a very precise hit in a specific part of the construction.
You mean ballistic missiles, not cruise missiles?
Ballistic missiles, yes.
No, no cruise missiles.
No, no cruise missiles, okay.
I mean, it doesn't matter.
You need something like a 2000 kg warhead and this must be extremely precise
and hitting this particular part of the construction in order to drop a bridge.
It is pointless to hit the middle of the bridge because you're just going to create a gap in the road.
Nothing is going to happen.
We have seen this on so many other examples, Antonovsky Bridge, almost two years ago.
So, excuse me, right now I don't see Ukraine having an ability to drop the catch bridge.
Okay, thank you.
Tom, we have the last question.
You recently described the scenario for ending the war in the Middle East.
You yourself called it almost fantastic.
Yeah, it is fantasy, yes.
Yes, so could you please describe more or less realistic scenario for ending the war in Ukraine?
No, I can't because I have no idea how to end it.
I mean, there is so much reform necessary alone in Ukraine.
You would need to reorganize the way your government is thinking, not only to say acting.
You would need to bring your population all to one side and say,
guys, we are really in danger of extermination.
If you are sitting at home and watching TV, you are screwing up all of you, all of us.
You don't even have this psychology.
I mean, okay, you have lots of volunteers and people are really trying to help the country and so on.
But a big part of the population is just sitting there and doing nothing for Ukraine.
Then, as next, you would have to understand that you need many more women in your armed forces in your industry and so on and so on.
I cannot understand that you still have unemployed people at war.
You have unemployed people in Ukraine. How can this happen?
I said, your defense sector is idling around working at 40% to 60% of capacity.
And even if it would certainly like to work at higher capacity, but it can't because the government does not have the money for that.
And so you have serious problems, very extensive problems with you.
I have no idea how to solve all of this.
So therefore, I have no clear idea how can you solve the problem.
Ideally, you would manufacture, let's say, 500 to 1000 tanks a year and then you would manufacture a similar number of heavy infantry fighting vehicles.
That means vehicles as well armored as tanks.
You would manufacture not one million FPV drones a year, but five million of them.
You would have enough pilots and crews for all of this.
You would equip your entire armed forces.
You would have, ideally, you would have enough artillery ammunition and even more important, you would have such missiles like FAT or rockets.
Actually, sorry, artillery rockets like FAT, which means you can deliver a warhead of 100, 200, 300 kilogram over range of 100 kilometers.
Ideally, you would need something like 20, at least 20 Patriots and batteries, plus a similar number of IST and 70.
If you are empty, you don't have anything of this and I don't see you getting anything of this, but even enough to patch up your air defenses and so on and so on.
So I have no solution right now.
What you need is plenty of firepower and I mean really firepower in terms of 100, 200, 300 kilogram warheads being delivered and obliterating entire Russian units.
This is happening perhaps once a month, but this is too little.
You would need this happening every single day.
I also do not understand, I mean, how long is it now that you have got the first high mass that was in summer 2022?
So two years and you're still not manufacturing high mass at home?
I cannot understand this.
Why not?
You're all the time waiting for Americans to have mercy and send you another 30 rockets.
Aether comes.
Why is nobody manufacturing aether comes in Ukraine?
Out of mind of what?
Instead, the government has been, as far as I have heard, is letting the Americans buy agricultural surfaces, real estate.
I mean, it's not letting them buy directly, but it says okay, if some foreigner wants to buy it, let's do it.
And Ukrainians don't have the money to do so, so foreigners are buying it.
And the first foreigners who are doing it in the soil are the Americans.
So you're going to end as what?
A heavily indebted, lucky home territory?
I don't know where is this heading.
I have no solution for this problem, excuse me.
I mean, Middle East is perfect in comparison.
Thank you, Tom.
I hope our audience will make the appropriate conclusions from your words.
And at the end, I would just mention that we're not publishing all of Tom's texts.
That's, I'm talking to our audience, all of Tom's texts for different reasons.
But if you are looking for an interesting, competent overview of the events in the Middle East,
I would probably suggest you to take a look at Tom's blog,
because I believe that a person who spent almost 40 years studying this region
probably knows a bit more comparing to those experts you are watching on our TV.
So thank you so much, Tom.
It was a big pleasure to talk to you and they hope we will have another interview a bit later.
Thank you very much for inviting me as well.
And please keep yourself safe and do the best for your country and for all of you.
Thank you, Tom.
Goodbye, everyone.
Stay safe.
Goodbye.
