Thank you, Tom. Let's move to the second chapter, which is called Air War. The first
question will be about Russian Cubs, guided bombs. There are reports that Russia has increased
the range of its Cubs from 30 kilometers up to even 80 kilometers. The question is how
much further can this range be increased? Okay, first start. Russia didn't increase the range.
The range was 60 to 70 kilometers already last year. This is simply physics. And this physics
comes from the weight of the weapon combined with the speed of the aircraft carrying it. At
the time it's released, plus the attitude of the aircraft. At the time it's released in the bomb.
So what happens, SO-34 comes in at an altitude between 9,000 and 12,000 meters at a high subsonic
speed, which means something like 1,100 kilometers per hour. So then it enters a shallow
climb, flies like this, and releases the bomb. The bombs drop from the aircraft, open their wings,
and then they glide over 60 to 70 kilometers in a parabolic trajectory until hitting the ground.
So the point is now the following. Depending on the sector of the front line, where they deploy
such bombs, in some cases, Russians are free to fly their SO-34s all the way over the Ukrainian
positions. For example, in Wuchleda area, the last two weeks, they were free to fly over Wuchleda.
Because the glorious general staff of the Ukrainian Armed Forces didn't take care to deploy at least
proper air defenses on that place. Therefore, they could reach 70 kilometers behind Wuchleda.
But in other sectors, for example, Kursk, they can't. In Kursk, the Ukrainian air defenses are strong
enough that the Russians have to release their bombs from 70 kilometers away, from, let's say,
50 kilometers behind their front line, to reach a target only 20 kilometers behind the Ukrainian
front line, 10 to 20 kilometers behind the Ukrainian front line. And then it appears to
plenty of people that the range is shorter than just 30 kilometers. In other cases,
the Russians do not need to hit something that is further away than 30 kilometers. So they are
releasing their bombs and they are striking targets just 30 kilometers away. Because the target is
simply closer and less well protected. So, correspondingly, the range was always 60 to 70
kilometers. And now it might be increased to around 100 kilometers with the help of rocket
boosters. That means there's a rocket engine, rocket motor, sorry, installed on the rear,
at the rear of the of the UMPK. And this is empowering the bomb. And instead of glide bomb,
it's becoming a guided missile de facto. So that is the answer to your question.
That's clear, Tom. Is it is it true that Russians already developed not
far flying Cubs, but also more powerful Cubs? I mean that more more heavier ones. For example,
everyone knows about Cup 500. But some people already say about Cup 900 or something like that.
Okay, let me clarify this. In the Soviet and therefore Russian Air Force, you have specific
calibers of bombs, 250 kilogram, 500 kilogram, 1000, 1500 kilogram, 3000, 5000 and 9000 kilogram
bombs. Okay, these are the biggest bombs. A FAB, Fugas, an aviation, a bomb, 5000,
9000 was the biggest one. And this 9000 means it is 9000 kilogram heavy or somewhere like that.
So correspondingly, for a 9000 kilogram bomb, you need a bomb which can carry a bomb weighting 9 tons.
That is the first point. The second point is, in order to make a glide bomb out of such a bomb,
you need very big wings, big wing surface. And the bigger the wing surface, the further it's flying.
Which in turn means you need the bomb itself is getting ever grow bigger and bigger.
Correspondingly, there is a big problem already with the bomb in caliber of 3000 kilogram of 3 tons.
The construction, this UMP key construction, this module which is installed on top of the bomb,
splitting wings, so it becomes a glide bomb, is so big and so heavy that the bomb is weighting
something like 4 tons. That means that a single SO-34 can only carry one at once, also because of
its sheer size. It is not only the size, it is the weight as well, because you have to consider,
you put a 4000 kilogram bomb under an aircraft and to connect it to the aircraft, you need a hard point,
which is, we call this pylon in English, which can carry 4000 kilogram.
And this pylon weights another 1000 kilogram. So now you have 4000 kilogram of a bomb,
1000 kilogram of the pylon and then you put that on the aircraft, on SO-34, in between the engines.
And you have, in this way, you have put 4000 kilogram on the aircraft.
SO-34 could theoretically carry 8000 kilogram of bombs, but then it's going to fly for the next 200 kilometers.
But because of the threat of Russian bases, they have moved SO-34s away from bases close to Ukraine,
therefore they have to fly very far away, from very far away, from warground in similar places,
and therefore they carry only one such bomb at once. So that is theory. Why? Because so far,
all I've seen, the biggest I've seen as deployed, was 1500 kilogram.
You're talking only about Russians or?
Russians, Russians, just Russians. 1500 kilogram. It could be that they have dropped
one or two, 3000, there are prototypes of 3000 kilogram heavy UMPK or carb bomb, if you like it.
It could be they have deployed two or three of this, but I haven't seen any clear evidence,
any definite evidence that there is such a weapon in serious production in Russia.
At least not its UMPK module. There are 3000 kilogram bombs in Russian arsenals,
and they are in production as well, but there are no UMPK modules which can be installed on such bombs
and manufactured in serious. So most of the times they're actually dropping bombs,
UMPK bombs or carb bombs, if you like, of 250 kilogram and 500 kilogram. From time to time,
they're dropping those of 1000, 1500 kilogram. But 3000 kilogram, I haven't seen clear evidence for
any so far. Even somewhere throughout the world, not only in Ukraine?
When we're talking about around the world. Yes, the question is, are there any examples of
applying such huge stuff, at least somewhere, maybe on the Middle East or somewhere else?
Okay, I see now what you mean. Here we have to distinguish between bombs designed and manufactured,
originally manufactured in Soviet Union, and nowadays in Russia, and between Western bombs.
Why? Because Western bombs are made of parts which should assemble together as necessary.
They are very flexible, they are modular, but they are construction. On Soviet dash Russian bombs,
everything is welded together. That's it. Bomb is delivered to the air base as it was manufactured,
as it was put together already in the factory. You can't change anything about it. So the question,
fundamental question or the fundamental issue while developing the carb or the UMPK
was how to make a module which you can put on such a bomb which is already ready for use.
And this means that every different caliber of bomb needs a different UMPK module. This module
must be ever bigger and bigger because it needs ever bigger wings so that it can reach this 60 to 70
kilometers. Correspondingly, nobody tried to do anything of this kind outside of Russia,
at least not with bombs bigger than 250 kilograms. North Koreans have a similar system,
like UMPK, which is useful for bombs caliber 250, perhaps 500 kilograms. And I've seen them in
use by Sudanese Air Force over Yemen, for example. This is also 7 years ago or something like that.
So this is all I have seen in regards to Soviet-Russian bombs. Then it comes to western bombs. The
situation is entirely different because western bombs are modular and you have you can put the
same kit, so-called kit, on different caliber of bombs. You have bombs caliber 125 kilograms,
125 kilograms, 250, 500, and 1000, actually 907, but let's say 1000 kilograms. So
you put the same guidance kit and the same set of wings on different caliber of bombs.
You can also use specialized casings or bomb bodies like BLU-109, this is this
bunker-buster bomb of 1000 kilogram caliber, or 2000 pounds, as we have seen when Israel
assassinated the Nasrallah. This is a specially hardened casing, which makes sure that bomb penetrates,
you know, goes down through the ground, 20, 30 meters through the ground before detonating.
But the guidance system and the wings system for this bomb is still the same like on any
general bomb, caliber 250 kilometers, because these bodies are all very flexible and modular.
So this is a difference. However, there are no heavier, at least not in widespread tactical
service, no heavier air released bombs in western service or of western origin than 1000 kilogram.
There is one type, this massive penetrator, whatever, 10,000 kilogram bomb in the United States,
but this is carried only by B-2 bombers, and that's it, not a tactical aircraft can deploy it.
So the heaviest bombs of this caliber are around 1000 kilograms in the west.
Tom, what about Ukraine? Can Ukraine, for example, use our favorite F-16s to apply such stuff?
Yes, of course. You could put two 1000 kilogram bombs on F-16.
What do you think? Is Ukrainian command going to use it?
Yes, you have already underdeveloped such a weapon. I'm just not sure if it is caliber 1000 kilogram,
but you certainly have such underdevelopment, a weapon of 500 kilogram.
That's very interesting. So let's stay on our favorite topic. Tom, how could you,
what's your opinion of the
using of western aircraft in Ukraine?
Look, in order to use western aircraft in Ukraine, you have to change the entire system,
how aviation is operating in Ukraine, and this is happening very, very slowly.
It took the delivery of F-16s to Ukraine for the top civilian authority in Ukraine,
I forgot the name, sorry now, to write a new set of regulations for pilots, for ground personnel,
for ground control and so on, and for radar systems and so on. So before that, you still had
the same system like in the Soviet Union. So now you have to, in order to use, the next step in
using western aircraft is to teach your people, your troops, your ground crews and your pilots to
speak English, which is the next hurdle because despite all the talk about we are going to buy
western aircraft, whether a sub-grip pen or F-16s or whatever else, of the last let's say 10 years
or something like that, nobody in the Air Force took here to organize English language courses
for pilots and for ground personnel, which means that every time Ukraine sends pilots and ground
personnel for training in the West, they first have to spend six months at least learning English.
So now once they learn English, only then can they start training actual flying training or aircraft.
Before they start this actual training, flight training on aircraft, they have to learn the
basic principles, procedures of flying in the West, which are fundamentally different than those in
the former Soviet Union. So even then, actually, they still do not instantly start training in
aircraft, but they first learn the procedures and terminology in order to start learning flying
aircraft or maintaining aircraft or arming them, refueling them and so on and so on. So you have
every time a new group of Ukrainians is sent to West to learn flying F-16s or whatever else,
it takes at least a year to get them so far that they start actually learning to fly the aircraft.
Correspondingly, from this point of view, you can instantly calculate how long is it going to take
for an entire Ukrainian Air Force to convert to, let's say, F-16s. This is just F-16s.
Another part is going to convert to Gripens. At least a unit is going to fly
this Sub-Evox aircraft and similar stuff.
So this is a process that is going to take years.
Can we say that today is too early to make conclusions about applying F-16s and other
aircraft in Ukraine? It's not too early. It's not too early. Don't worry. Let's say,
even if the Dutch would junk all of their 40 or whatever F-16s that are still around
up on Ukraine tomorrow in the morning, it will still take you one to two years to train enough
personnel to fly all of them. You do not have people enough people. Someone is already flying.
Just flying over Ukraine. You don't have enough pilots. You don't have enough ground personnel.
You don't have the support infrastructure. You don't have the spares. You don't have
maintenance facilities in Ukraine. You don't have it. It's simply not there.
You mean that those aircraft which already fly above Ukraine, they do not conduct any military
mission? Oh, no. I do not say that. What do they do? There are five F-16s in Ukraine. This is the
group that was delivered two months ago, and they are flying air combat sorties, air defense sorties.
I'm not dispute about this. But increasing this number to, let's say, 30 or something meaningful
to a number that is making sense or having its effect upon developments on the battlefield,
it's going to take its time. Okay, that's clear. We also had a question that is being asked throughout
Ukraine for about three years. Why don't we still have our own iron dome above Ukraine?
What's about Ukrainian air defense? Where should I start? Well, I mean, you are Ukrainian. You
know it better than me. You grew up in Ukraine, if nothing else. I've never been to Ukraine.
The first problem is that from the independence in 1991, 1992, until 2014, nobody cared about
Ukrainian armed forces. So they were constantly decreased, decreased, decreased, decreased,
downsized, downsized. Units were constantly disbanded. Air bases were closed. Nobody needed
armed forces. There was peace everywhere. Everything was so beautiful. And well, it's a matter of
fact that Ukrainian economy wasn't particularly good. So you had a situation where there was no money
for the city. And therefore, although you had excellent companies which could
design a manufacturing weaponry, nobody was buying this weaponry. And so these companies,
in some cases, ended working for the Russians and not only a few of them. So when the Russians needed
some kind of guided, tactical guided weapons, air-to-air missiles and so on, these were made,
at least major parts of them, major assemblies of them were made in Ukraine.
And then the Russians would either use these at home or sell them abroad, export them
to whatever customers. So now the 2014 came and there are lots of announcements and blah, blah,
blah, blah. And nothing happened. Or the most that has happened was to overhaul MiG-29s and S-25s
very few, F-22s, S-27s. So they were overhauled. That means that they were taken apart,
cleaned, refurbished, most important pieces were replaced. And then everything was assembled,
painted anew. And they received a new radio, they received new weapons management systems.
MiG-29s have even received this new computer, which is improving the performance of their radar.
Beautiful. Yeah. And that's it. Nobody came to the idea, obviously, to finance the installation of
or development research and installation of actually serious production and installation
of new air-to-air missiles on MiG-29s or S-27s. So this is the first point. The second point is
in order to have such weaponry, whether air-to-air missiles or surface-to-air missiles,
you should have had somebody who would manufacture them. Basically, you had several design bureaus
like Luch, for example, who have designs of new air-to-air missile and its surface launched version
with a range of something like 100 kilometers, which is something which your armed forces
would need urgently right now, and then not in a few examples, but in thousands. But it's not there.
Why? Well, because obviously, somebody there is convinced that these are old companies,
that they are too complex and they're wasting too much money and doing nothing and they're
useful and to whatever else. Therefore, nothing is done. And now, even if Luch would start,
actually give Artyom the production to launch this production, the serious production of this
new weaponry, it would take at least a year to introduce it to service. On the other side,
meanwhile, Artyom was heavily hit several times by the Russians this summer, so I don't even know
how much of its underground facilities are still actually operational. So why didn't this happen?
Because nobody in Kiev had the far side enough to say, okay, guys, we have to build up,
we have to invest into our defense sector, we have to reform it on time and then let it
start manufacturing new weaponry on time. Nothing happened in these regards, actually, even as of,
was it Autumn 2022, perhaps in Autumn the last year. And therefore, you do not have
in serious production, you do not have new ballistic missiles, you do not have air-to-air
missiles, you do not have surface-to-air missiles, although your companies have ready to use designs
for them and they could put them into production. The next point is also that there is always this
petty bickering about who is going to get the money for this. You have advisors to the
government who are complaining that Artyom and Luch, they are old and this is too complex,
and let's not give them money. Let's get this stuff from the West, which is nonsensical.
It would have been better to pay Artyom already back in 2022 to start manufacturing this new
air-to-air missiles and surface-to-air missiles. However, the government back then was convinced
now this war is going to end, whatever, in the six months, 12 months or something.
Therefore, you didn't launch production on time. Even the Neptune anti-ship missile,
which is meanwhile also developed as a cruise missile, was available on in prototype form,
some 12 or 15 examples around in February 2022. This first successful deployment against
Russian guided missile cruiser Moskva was actually something like an ultimate test of the weapon.
Before that, there was no operational unit in the Ukrainian Armed Forces operating
Neptune's. And ever since, how many are manufactured? 15 perhaps a year. 15 a year,
where you could need actually, let's say at least 500 of them, and probably then develop them
into land attack versions, which could be launched from Asia 24, so you don't need to beg
Germans, British, French and the Americans for more storm shadows and similar stuff.
You could have had all of this already years ago. Your government just failed to reorganize the
defense sector, to finance it properly, to launch the production. Right now, your defense sector is
working with 40 to 60 percent of its capacity, which means actually that people are sitting there
and working something like let's say four to five hours a day instead of eight hours a day in three
shifts. This is insane. You're facing a war of extermination and your defense sector is sitting
there and waiting for better times. Because there's nobody in Kiev capable of reorganizing
the financing of the sector and then the management of the sector itself. Nothing is happening.
There are always big announcements, but until somebody from the West comes in,
pays a lot of money probably somewhere, and then invests a lot of money into one or the other
factory, nothing happens. And that is why you don't have modern air-to-air missiles for your
suhuis and for your mix, and why you don't have enough surface-to-air missiles, and why
therefore the entire production and the entire defense sector's future functionality
is under a big question mark.
