Great, greetings to everyone who is watching us, hope you all are safe.
My name is Konstantin Shabalev, and today we together with my colleague, media expert
Sergey Chernevsky are happy to introduce our guest.
It's Tom Cooper, military historian, writer and analyst from Austria.
Tom himself has Austria's Mozart, not kangaroo, but I hope that our audience is educated enough not to confuse.
Hello, Tom, how are you?
Hello, thank you, fine, nice to be with you today.
Great, so among other things, Tom is known in Ukraine as an author of regular updates on the Russian-Ukrainian war.
And almost six months have passed since our first interview, a lot of things changed, and we'd like to discuss them with Tom.
We tried to divide our conversation in several sections, like Tom does in his updates, so the first chapter of our talk is called the Ground War.
And the first question is the following, Tom, we are forced to start with a sad topic earlier this week, Ukraine with Derov from Vuhledar.
And you were describing this process almost live, and now we'd like to know your opinion on what consequences will it cause for Ukraine.
Vuhledar, it's a topic, very frustrating topic because this was such a left down of a great unit that was fighting courageously and with huge skill for two years in that place alone,
we talked about the Battle of Moschun, north-west of Kiev, back in March 2022, and was now left down by top political leadership in Ukraine, by the general staff of Ukrainian armed forces, like really, it's in a most shameful way.
And what should I tell you, I mean, it wasn't really an orderly withdrawal, everybody is calling withdrawal in Ukraine.
Actually, the last two or three days, the defenses of the 72nd collapsed, the Russians attacked from three sides, draw in, captured, I don't know how many troops killed, I don't know how many troops, including plenty of wounded troops,
the soldiers of the 72nd have demanded a withdrawal on time, there was no reaction from Kiev at all, as usually, I mean, it is a shameful episode in the history of Ukraine and nothing else.
It is such a meanwhile typical failure of the political and military leadership in the country that I simply, I cannot understand that something of this kind is happening.
And now, what is after, what now, well, what is left of the 72nd Brigade, perhaps 1000 troops who are tired, exhausted, demoralized, who is going to replace them, who is going to replace such an excellent defense position for the next 30 or 40 kilometers in western or northwestern direction, there is nothing.
So when you ask me what is going to happen now or whatever, I'm not sure, I mean, the only thing we can actually expect is Russia, further Russian advance in western and northwestern direction, or northern direction towards Pokrovsk, that's what's going to happen.
And I do not see the Ukrainian armed forces having a strong position on the way to say Pokrovsk. That's the situation.
Okay, we'll talk about the Ukrainian command a bit later and you mentioned Pokrovsk. Our second question was about this place. Russian army continues to slowly advance towards Pokrovsk.
And what do you think, if they do manage to occupy it, what will be their next target? As I understand, it's some kind of point from which they can advance in different ways.
Pokrovsk, that is related to Vukhleda. And to the situation at the political top in Kiev and in the general staff of the Ukrainian armed forces. If they continue fighting this war the way they are doing this the last year or so, actually the last one and a half year, almost two years, Pokrovsk is lost already now.
It's pointless to fight for it almost, because it's nothing is going to happen over there, except yet more losses for Ukraine and yet more victories for Russia.
Well, this victory is actually laughable, but okay, who cares. Point is this, you have a president who is fighting for some kind of imaginary USAID and spending and wasting his time with some kind of peace plan which he is then traveling to the United States and presenting it there and to Biden and to Trump and so on.
And what peace plan? What peace plan? There is only one party in this war which can stop this war immediately. And this is Russia, this is Putin. He can stop immediately. Ukraine has no chance to do anything of that kind.
The United States has no chance of doing that. Germany has no chance. Whoever else has no chance. But Russia can stop it. But Russia has absolutely no reason to stop it, because everything is working straight into Putin's hands.
Then the next point. Expecting the Americans now to start providing sufficient support for Ukraine to win this war, to at least liberate some kind of serious portion of territory inside Ukraine is not going to happen.
If nobody in Ukraine has realized this by now, well, it's about the time for somebody to start realizing it finally. But this is also not happening. So you are wasting, your political leadership is wasting time for some kind of fantasies around.
The only thing I've seen him doing that is making sense in the last, let's say, two weeks was this conference with different manufacturers and designers of modern weaponry and trying to attract them into investing into Ukrainian sector of manufacturing defense equipment, ammunition and weaponry.
And this is all. And this is also too little. And going also in some kind chaotic direction, because what is happening? You have, for example, Denmark financing the production of Bohdan self-propelled howitzer in Ukraine.
Beautiful idea, really. You have also another company investing into production of ammunition for such howitzers in Ukraine, also beautifully there.
But who is going to protect this factory where this ammunition is going to be manufactured? Who is going to protect the factory where the Bohdanas are going to be manufactured? And who is going to protect the power supply network, which is necessary in order to manufacture this stuff?
For this, you need air defenses, and you are getting too little air defense systems from the West and even less surface to air missiles from the West.
And nobody is going to invest, obviously, so far into, for example, Ukrainian companies like Luch and Artyom, launching production of Ukrainian designed surface to air missiles.
So this means, okay, you build something and then it's going to be destroyed by the Russians because you cannot protect it.
Is that making sense to you? It is not making sense to me. And what we have actually here right now, or meanwhile, Ukraine is another typical example of Western warfare of the last 30, 40 years.
The West can lose another war. We can afford that. It has lost Iraq. It has lost Afghanistan. No problem. We can afford to lose Ukraine as well. Also, no problem.
We have all the time of the world. We are more concerned about the next vacation, new car, our internet connection, watching Netflix in the evening, football, whatever else, having fun.
Everything is fine for us. But Ukraine, if you lose the war, there's no Ukraine left anymore.
And nobody here in the West is understanding this situation. And nobody is taking corresponding measures. You get lots of promises. Ukraine is getting lots of promises.
But in the end effect, nothing is happening. So you have a situation where the Western point of view and the Ukrainian point of view are at entirely different levels.
Ukrainian point of view is somewhere up here. The Western, oh, who cares? And who cares if West loses again in Ukraine? Nobody cares. Because we can afford that.
And nobody in Ukraine right now is taking care or sufficient care to make this obvious in the West, firstly and secondly, to say, okay, thank you very much.
You do not want to help seriously in serious fashion. You do not want to help us to defeat Russia. Whatever are the reasons, your fantasies about modeling the outcome and saving Russia from falling apart and saving Putin from losing face or whatever else.
Okay, fine. Thank you. Then just finance this and that. Thank you very much. And that's all we need. Because this is the only way forward. Ukraine must make itself as much as possible independent from any kind of Western political or military influence.
But at the same time develop its own defense sector, the industry, so so well and protect it so well that it can actually manufacture, develop and produce, put to the field.
Enough heavy armament, enough ammunition for its own needs and defeat Russia. You have no other way out of this situation. But right now, there are just conferences talking about talking, meetings, one meeting after the other.
You're almost answered on a bunch of our next questions. That may I turn you back for a few moments to clarify one question which buzzers as me and Sergey, we are from Dnipro.
Together, do you think Russians can achieve Dnipro in a few months or next year? Dnipro, I mean not river, but city.
Do the Russians, can the Russians reach Dnipro within one year or the next year? Oh gosh, that's a good question. Let me check a map. I don't know all the distances by heart. Ukraine.
Dnipro.
Dnipro.
No, within one year not, not next year not. But if the things go on like the last, let's say one year, definitely by 2026.
So by saying this, you mean that the war will still continue in 2026?
Definitely. The way things are right now, no way this is going to stop even before 2030. Because Ukraine is not taking care to get the means to fight on its own without any kind of Western interference which is nonsensical, nothing else.
And at the same time, the West is not interested in helping Ukraine fight this war in a quicker fashion and more effective fashion.
So you are actually going to have only the worsening of the situation because you can see this for just one example.
Every night, Russians are sending between, let's say, 1520 and 5060 Shahid or Geran attack UAVs over the Ukrainian airspace.
At least one third of this, let's say at least five and more often 2030 of this, are shot down by surface-to-air missiles which are supplied by the West.
So this means an attrition of some, let's say, per week, that's something like 5060 surface-to-air missiles, which the West is not manufacturing.
The West manufactures as many missiles perhaps a month, but not per week.
Which means that at some point in time, you're going to run out of surface-to-air missiles again.
And the West is not going to do anything necessary to bolster, to rapidly increase the production of its surface-to-air missiles.
Because if it would be doing something these regards, it would be doing that already now.
It would have announced this at least now if not already two years ago, but it didn't do so.
And therefore, sooner or later, you're going to run out of surface-to-air missiles, probably this winter.
As next, the Russians are then going to disable your power supply, the remaining thermal and hydroelectric power stations, power plants.
And then, when you don't have the electricity, how can you manufacture?
You can't manufacture guns, you can't manufacture ammunition.
And you can't keep your civilian supply with electricity.
What then?
So, unless there is a significant change in these regards alone, there is no improvement of the situation.
And then thirdly, there was this big announcement of Czech arms deal or Czech artillery ammunition deal.
They have found some source, probably Turkey, and they are going to supply how many? Two million or whatever artillery shells in addition to what is going to come to production.
Eventually, oh no, this is not really good.
That is what the Western industry said to that.
And because the Western industry said so, the politicians said so as well.
And you haven't got even one million shells out of that deal by now, and they're not going to get one million shells by the end of the year.
Why? Because only a part of the countries of some 20 or something countries who have announced they're going to finance this position is ready to pay anything for the shells in question.
Why? Because they are cheaper than the shells manufactured in Europe.
I mean, again, Ukrainian situation is up here, it's urgent, it's an emergency.
The Western situation, how can we make more money out of this? That's the only thing that matters.
Tom, you're telling quite scary and sad things.
Maybe I will try to add some positive in our discussion.
Let's talk about Ursk.
I was watching one of your interviews last month, and you were quite enthusiastic on this topic.
Do you still consider this operation successful or your opinion has changed?
When you monitor war in general, every war is an extension of politics by other means, precisely defined by von Klausowitz in the 19th century or earlier.
Anyway, in military sense, this was an excellent operation.
Why? It drew into Russia, occupied territory, defeated lots of Russian units, destroyed even more Russian units, scared his entire regime,
and forced them to patch some sort of front line to withdraw, for example, units, especially from Northern Kharkiv, to Ursk in order to form a new front line.
The problem was the usual, namely, there is not enough supply of ammunition and there are not enough troops and units,
and especially not enough air defenses to drive this, to exploit this penetration into Russia to sufficient depth, which would be some 100 kilometers, perhaps 150 kilometers.
Instead, Ukrainian units drew some 25-30 kilometers maximum into inside Russia.
And with this, this operation remains incomplete.
So at military level, it was an excellent idea and fantastic achievement, absolutely no doubt about this.
At political level, it ended nowhere for exactly the same set of reasons why all the other Ukrainian operations are ending nowhere,
which is that the president is fighting a war for scoring propaganda points in the West,
appeasing and pleasing the Western politicians who are not interested in him actually anymore, who are not interested even in supporting Ukraine seriously enough.
And with this, we are ending actually this story.
As long as Ukraine is running propaganda operations, it's not going to win the war.
You cannot win a war with propaganda operations.
This is something for both the immoral on temporary basis, last for, as we can see, two months, and then it's over.
But there is no liberation of any kind of Ukrainian territory and Ukraine is not a step, not an inch, actually, closer to liberation of Donbas and of Crimea.
So politically, nothing has changed.
So what should Ukrainians do with Kursk next?
Well, hold it as long as you can, of course.
You have no other solution.
The troops are over there.
If you withdraw the troops now from Ukraine, sorry, from Russia, from the Kursk oblast, that would be a huge shame.
So another failure.
Why have you sent your troops into Russia?
Why have you lost at least 300 killed and over 1,000 wounded so far in two months of fighting?
For what?
To withdraw now?
Is that the aim of the operation?
I think not.
So hold out as long as you can.
The question is, how long can you hold?
Right now, the Ukrainians have relatively good positions, especially in what is it, Orgoka and Shep-2-Kovka area.
They are up in the hills and the Russians attempt to approach them.
They hit them from above.
They see them on time, hit them from above and so on.
So it's relatively easy.
On the other side of the same hill, they can see towards Lubimovka, so things are relatively simple.
If they lose these hills, which can happen, then it's going to become unpleasant and the entire operation is going to end with a failure.
Tom, you mentioned mistakes of our political leaders.
But previously, while describing the Vuhledar operation, you already mentioned the mistakes of Ukrainian Genstab military command.
Can you name the main mistakes and probably you could suggest how that mistakes could be corrected?
The primary mistake is the over-centralization and micromanagement by the top of commanders, but the highest commander, especially Sieski.
What he is doing was okay, for example, to sort out the troubles in areas like, well, even that was too late, in Bakhmut last year or in Avidivka early this year.
There were too many elements from different units fighting in the same sector without coordination.
But now there comes the problem.
Sieski has doubt his commanders that either they deliver him good news or they are in trouble.
So the problem is, if they are in trouble, they are going to get dismissed or something else, so he is going to command their own units over their shoulder instead of them.
Which is absolutely insane there.
You do not do such things.
You have to train your commanders.
That's Russian style as I can.
Well, more or less Russian style, yes.
The point is to train your commanders so that you as the superior commanders in Sieski's position can trust them to tell you what is going on.
Precisely the way it has happened.
And not do you some kind of crazy favors through lying to you.
That is the first point.
The second point is to train your commanders so that you can depend on them to do a good job.
And lots of Ukrainian commanders are still not doing a good job.
And I am talking about battalion and brigade commanders.
The command level in between brigade commanders and Sieski should actually be responsible for controlling the job of brigade and battalion commanders, but it's not doing that at all.
It's like it's not there.
I don't know why the officers in question actually paid.
Except perhaps from time to time to report something nice to Sieski.
Excuse me, my cat would like to take part in this interview.
Where did I stop?
Yes, you have groups of forces and they should be doing the job which Sieski is currently doing.
While Sieski's job should be to inspect and check that everything is working.
And finally, you have Genstaff which is serving Sieski as a commander instead of writing a new doctrine of the armed forces based on ten years of bloody experience of the Ukrainian armed forces.
So that all the new commanders in the future, whether tomorrow or in two years from now, are instantly taught all of these experiences.
But it's not doing that.
It's serving Sieski's purposes, which is centralized command and super control of everything and everybody.
And what a surprise amid all of this actually chaos, centralized chaos, it's not working.
It can't work and it is never going to work the way it is organized right now.
It didn't work when it was decentralized under Zaluzhnyi and it's not going to work when it's over centralized under Sieski.
Apparently, in Ukrainian armed forces, you simply can't find some middle way to delegating, to teaching your subordinates to do their job, to trusting them and so on.
This is something that is obviously sort of impossible to do. I don't know how to describe it.
And therefore, again, you have this superior commander who is controlling and commanding everybody.
And then you also have a president who is fighting a propaganda war instead of taking care to listen to advice of his military commanders
who cannot even advise him properly because they are not listening to advice from their subordinates.
Then you have, as I said, you have a bardak, excuse me, for his passion.
And this is what you have in Ukraine right now.
I mentioned also general staff and the necessity to write a new doctrine of armed forces.
This doctrine should also teach the commanders that after every single operation, they have to sit down with their subordinates and discuss what went wrong and what was done well.
This is not done. You have something like 60 brigades in Ukrainian armed forces and perhaps three are doing this right now.
The 47th, the 3rd and the 4th National Guard, perhaps the 12th National Guard as of brigade as well.
So you have less than 5% of the force is doing debriefs after operations. This is a catastrophe.
This means that all the lessons learned and paid in blood every single day are lost because nobody is learning from them.
We have seen this also in the Air Force and Air Defense Force.
Oh, everything is fine. We are shooting down Shahids, we are shooting down Kinshaws, we are shooting down Zircons, we are shooting down the Mars people and Jupiter people as well.
And then 12, at least 12 Russian cruise missiles fly through that super turbo air defense system and hit a hospital in downtown of Kiev in July.
And what is the Air Force reporting? It was just 12 missiles and we have shot down all of them, including those you can see on the videos coming down and hitting the hospital and killing women and children.
The same also with F-16 which was shot down by armed forces. How long is it now? One month? We are going to investigate. One month later?
Oh, who we? We should investigate this or what?
Excuse me, Tom, let's leave F-16.
Just a second, it came so far that the Americans do not trust themselves anymore to ask what has happened to that F-16 because they know then there is going to be no reply.
Sorry.
I wanted to say that let's leave F-16 for a bit later. We have a separate part for them.
Our last question in this section, we already told you that lots of our audience is located in the southern Ukraine in Kherson.
What's your predictions for Kherson and Kherson region for this fall and the next year?
My predictions, I said I'm not making predictions, I'm making post-assessments.
Let's say estimate.
Okay, okay, okay, estimate. Just a second, I'm powering up a map of the battlefield.
What you can expect next is that the Russians are going to attack from Wukhle, the directions towards what is the place first in the direction of Bahatia and Constantinople in order to, because there is nothing in between.
There is just open terrain. There are no hills, no forests, just open fields.
So they have something like 30 kilometers up to there and this is where they are going to close this corner with something like a dozen of Ukrainian brigades in between of Wukhle and southern side of the battlefield at Pokrovsk.
In Pokrovsk itself, you have to expect them to drive around such fortifications still left in front of the town like Selidovje, for example, that's what they are already doing.
They are trying to surround Selidovje by an advance from southern side and then from the northern side as well because the 15th Karadag is doing a very good job with defending Selidovje.
So they cannot take the town without surrounding it first and those forcing the 15th National Guard Brigade to withdraw from there in order to avoid that encirclement.
So once they do that, they are going to go up to Lisik and Chefchenko and search for a way to start surrounding Pokrovsk as well.
That is Pokrovsk.
The rest of that operation, I mean, once they are in Pokrovsk, well, then I'm not sure what exactly they're going to do but they're probably going to try to finish off Toretsk in between.
Toretsk is going to take them another two or three months probably to complete but not much longer so we can expect that Toretsk is going to fall by the end of this year.
So Pokrovsk, I would say by March, reaching Pavlovgrad might become their next objective but that is going to take them another year.
So sometimes in summer, autumn next year, they might get all the way to Pavlovgrad.
What else do we have in between? Up the front line?
Excuse me, may I ask you to move? It's southern to Kerson.
To remain in the south. Well, basically they need not attacking in the south, they need not attacking southern Zaporozhia because everything is doing along their ideas in the east.
So why attacking where they are not going to get to as we have seen this summer in Robotinia area, for example, in what is that?
Excuse me, just a check to map south of Velikonovo-Silka in Urogyne, for example, okay, they have captured Urogyne but they cannot hold it.
So why wasting their resources by deploying them somewhere else if they are successful in the east? And they are successful in the east.
So can I conclude that the situation for Kerson will remain the same for the next year?
Yeah, for the next year and a half. As long as not something substantial happens in Kiev, for example.
